There are several critical twitter posts showing pictures of priests burning incense to ward off COVID in Addis and in cities in the US and UK (and also of priests from other Orthodox churches such as Georgia)\nHowever, this needs to be seen in cultural and historical context. The 1918 Influenza epidemic - the so-called Spanish Flu (which came to Ethiopia from the coast in two waves in April and from August to November) killed up to 10,000 people or an estimated one-fifth of the population of Addis Ababa.\nAnnual burning of rubbish in commemoration has continued on Hidar 12, St Mikael's day, and you can see the hazy skyline in the picture I took last year on the 100th anniversary.\nWill we be remembering COVID-19 in 2120? How will it be commemorated?\nAm pasting below an article published in the Capital newspaper last November based on my father's articles in Journal of Ethiopian Studies in 1975 and Journal of Ethiopian Medicine in 1989.\nTHE INVENTION OF TRADITION: THE LEGACY OF YeHidar Beshita, ONE HUNDRED YEARS LATER\n"If you were up early last Wednesday and thought the air was cloudy with pollution, it was in fact due to a cleansing activity that has been carried out annually on the same day for exactly one hundred years. This week on Wednesday 21st of November was Saint Michael’s day, the 12th of Hidar. As on the same day every year neighbourhoods in Addis Ababa made bonfires early in the morning to burn rubbish, a tradition invented one hundred years ago and still going strong, even though many may not remember or know the reason. The tradition goes back to 1918 and the influenza that swept across the globe, known in Europe as the Spanish Flu.\nThe influenza came to Ethiopia from the coast probably brought from Aden by steamer to Djibouti and then by railway to Addis Ababa as Richard Pankhurst documented in the Journal of Ethiopian Studies in 1975 and the Ethiopian Medical Journal in 1989. There was a first wave from April 1918 which was misdiagnosed as typhus or smallpox. The second wave from August 1918 was much more serious and as Aleqa Kinfe Hadisu put it “spread like a forest fire in the grassland”. Up to ten thousand people are said to have died in Addis Ababa alone as recorded much later by the Emperor Haile Sellassie in his autobiography, representing up to a fifth of the then population. On some days over a hundred people were buried in a single church.\nPeople fell in by the thousands. The Regent, Ras Teferi Mekonnen became seriously ill, gave gifts to many churches and took Holy Communion. To stem rumours that he had died he made a public appearance on Meskerem 20. The Minister of War, Fitawrari Habte-Giorgis, was called back from a campaign, but he too fell ill. Four foreign doctors died, including two of the Regent’s doctors, Dr Assad Chaiban, a Lebanese, and Dr Ohanes Devletian, an Armenian, as well as Dr Wakeman an Anglo-Indian doctor and Dr Le Pape a French Doctor; two of the remaining four foreign doctors, a Frenchman and a Pole fell ill, the latter shutting himself off from the public when a friend staying with him died. The other two doctors Dr D”Antoine De Basas, a Frenchman, and Dr Hamid Nia, an Indian, continued to try to treat patients. Some people recommended using Eucalyptus and garlic and others drank alcohol which was believed to help.\nAs the Swedish missionary Cederqviest noted, the epidemic attacked people from all walks of life from the nobility, to the peasantry and slaves, old and young, educated and uneducated in the thousands. Aleqa Kinfe remarked that the epidemic was “accepted as a relative as it affected whole families”. Among the prominent personalities who died were Dejazmach Abreha Araya, the nephew of Emperor Yohannes who had been governor of Tigre, and Aleqa Woldegiorgis, the father confessor of King Teklehaymanot of Gojjam.\nThere was a shortage of gravediggers and no more available spaces in church graveyards, so shallow graves were dug, and some were buried on top of other graves, and later corpses were left in abandoned houses. Aleqa Kinfe reported that “nobody bothered to bury the dead by the roadside, they simply walked by”. There was a story of a man who dug a grave and when he came back it had already been used by someone else.\nThere were also acts of kindness, when a mother who came with a dead child was helped to bury her child by others who had come to bury their relatives. There was no weeping and mourning. Some of the dead were thrown in ditches or streams leading to concerns about water and air pollution, as noted later by the British Minister Wilfred Thesiger who postponed returning from leave until the epidemic was over. Aleqa Kinfe recalled that “dogs and vultures ate corpses by day and hyenas by night”.\nFood became scarce and prohibitively expensive as peasants feared coming to the town. Shops were closed, pharmacies had no supplies, police and courts stopped functioning, and postal and telegraphic services were suspended. The capital was deserted, apart from funerals by day and thieves by night.\nMany people shut themselves in their homes and refused to receive visitors and entry to the palace Gebbi, was forbidden. Others fled the capital including the Egyptian Abuna Matewos, Ras Kassa Hailu, the Regent’s cousin, and Kantiba Wesene ZeAmanuel, who was summoned back to restore order but later succumbed and died. There were also rumours that Empress Zewditu was about to move to Ankober.\nThere were also signs of solidarity as people were said to be reconciled with enemies without the need for intermediaries. One night in Hidar there was a lot of shooting said to be to dispel the evil spirits. After the climax about the time of Hidar Mikael, the epidemic miraculously burnt itself out very rapidly by the end of the month, and Aleqa Kinfe recorded that it was widely believed that this was due to the intervention of Our Lady Mary. That year in many areas peasants who had been unable to produce food were exempted from paying taxes. Soon after the epidemic became known as “YeHidar Beshita” the disease of the month of Hidar.\nThe practice of burning rubbish originated as a measure to counter the risks from the epidemic and became an annual tradition on the Day of St Michael in the month of Hidar. The practice has been observed assiduously ever since for no less than one hundred years. This is a testimony to the power of tradition, anchored within the Ethiopian Orthodox Calendar, and demonstrating the ability of local communities to adhere to this commemoration of this devastating epidemic for a full century".\n